## 19.1.0
(2019-07-02)

This is a feature release, we recommend upgrading to it from the 19.0.x releases.

### Java

* Improved speed of just-in-time (JIT) compilation in GraalVM, which significantly
improves the performance on medium length workloads.
* Applied profile-guided optimization (PGO) when building the ahead-of-time (AOT) image of the compiler. This enables more aggressive optimization of the compiler itself providing better compilation throughput.

### Native image

We fixed many issues that were reported on GitHub. You can browse the full list [here](https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3Anative-image+updated%3A%3E2019-06-07).

### JavaScript
* Added an experimental option `js.locale` to set the default locale for locale-sensitive operations.
* Allow making evaluated sources internal using the `sourceURL` directive by prefixing the URL with `internal:`, e.g. `//# sourceURL=internal:myname.js`.
* Enabled code sharing across threads using `ContextPolicy.SHARED`.

### LLVM interpreter
* Calling `exit(...)` in an embedded context is now a catchable `PolyglotException`.
* Skip source path entries that we are not allowed to access. Previously, when
running in an embedded context with restricted access to the file system, the
LLVM engine threw an exception when it could not read the source files, even if
no debugger was attached. Now it will still run. Only when a debugger is
attached, an error is reported when the source file can't be accessed.

### Ruby

The GraalVM Ruby implementation in this version targets performance and compatibility improvements, new features implementations and multiple bug fixes. The most notable include:

* Interactive sources (like the GraalVM polyglot shell) now all share the same binding ([#1695](https://github.com/oracle/truffleruby/issues/1695)).
* Hash code calculation has been improved to reduce hash collisions for `Hash` and other cases.
* `eval(code, binding)` for a fixed code containing blocks is now much faster. This improves the performance of rendering ERB templates containing loops.
* `rb_str_cat` is faster due to the C string now being concatenated without first being converted to a Ruby string or having its encoding checked.

A complete [changelog](https://github.com/oracle/truffleruby/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#1910-june-2019) for the Ruby component is available on GitHub.

### R

* Strings `-Inf`, `+NaN`, and `-NaN` are correctly parsed to doubles including ignoring leading and trailing whitespaces.
* For loop creates and initializes the control variable even if there are no iterations ([#77](https://github.com/oracle/fastr/issues/77)).
* Updated the output of the capabilities builtin ([#78](https://github.com/oracle/fastr/issues/78)).
* `is.function` returns `true` for foreign executables.

The complete project [changelog](https://github.com/oracle/fastr/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#1910) is available on GitHub.

### Python
* Updated Python standard library files from 3.7.0 to 3.7.3.
* Improved performance of exceptions that do not escape.
* Fixed caching of core sources in a native image with a preinitialized context
for pre-built images and libpolyglot fast startup.
* Implemented support for `pwd.getpwuid`, `os.exec`, `os.execv`, and `os.execl` modules.

To see a complete list of changes, please refer to the project [changelog](https://github.com/graalvm/graalpython/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#version-1910).
